---
title: "The USB: Data recovery from FAT32 image"
date: 2025-1-11
categories:
  - forensics
tags:
  - usb
  - storage
  - tools
header:
  image: /assets/images/BANNERS/Coral_Ocean_Crossing.png
  teaser: /assets/images/BANNERS/Coral_Ocean_Crossing.png
---
<h1>Introduction</h1>
Hi there, today we will be breifly covering how recover file raw data from a disk image of a USB FAT32 file system.

<h1>How to manually recover file data on USB using FAT32 (non deleted)</h1>
This will be done using FTK imager as it's easier.

<h2>General steps</h2>
- Find short filename entry to get first cluster location
- Go to its first cluster
- Select data from its first cluster to the end
- Retreive data from there

<h1>1.Go to [root]</h1>
{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/BLOG_2_USB/img/Figure1_new.png" alt="MBR non-bootable" caption="FOX621_SAMPLE1_FW evidence list via FTK imager" %}

<h1>2.Find the short file name entry</h1>
You can find it via:
Find > Text (make sure to click ANSI, Unicode) > type it first 5 to 6 letters of filename > 
As we are looking for FOX621_SAMPLE1_FW.png, we will type ‘FOX621’
{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/BLOG_2_USB/img/Figure2_new.png" alt="MBR non-bootable" caption="Finding FOX621 in root" %}

To locate the short file name entry, look for the short file name which is in this format:

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/BLOG_2_USB/diagrams/diagram1_FATSFN_new.png" alt="MBR non-bootable" caption="Finding FOX621 in root" %}

After locating the short file name entry, to further verify that it is the correct file, cross reference the long file name with the actual filename.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/BLOG_2_USB/img/Figure3_new.png" alt="MBR non-bootable" caption="FOX621_FW_1’s long file name entry" %}

<h1>3.Find first cluster in short file name entry</h1>
It is located at byte offset 0x1A so the value will be 0x000B. Take the value times 4 (as each entry in the FAT table is 4 bytes) and you will get 0x002C. 

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/BLOG_2_USB/img/Figure4_new.png" alt="MBR non-bootable" caption="FOX621_FW_1’s short file name entry" %}


<h1>4.Go to $FAT table </h1>
Go to $FAT1 > Find > Byte offset > 2C (hex)

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/BLOG_2_USB/img/Figure5_new.png" alt="MBR non-bootable" caption="FOX621_FW_1’s first cluster in FAT1" %}

The first cluster tells us the next cluster is at (0x0C * 4) Which will lead us to the next 4 bytes and so on till we reached the E0F. This will continue on till we reached the EOF. To speed it up, use Find > Binary > FFFF. This should bring you to the EOF for this file, considering if there are zero fragementations along the way.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/BLOG_2_USB/img/Figure7_new.png" alt="MBR non-bootable" caption="Screenshot of FOX621_FW_1 's EOF cluster" %}

<h1>5. Calculating where the data starts.</h1>
The formula to find where it starts raw (in sectors) is:
Reserved sectors +  (sectors per FAT * no. of FAT) + ([clusters-2] *no. of sectors per clusters )= raw data starting sector.


<h2>Finding the no. of reserved sectors.</h2>
Read from byte offset 0x0E at VBR, we get the value of 0x0D92 which translates to 3474 sectors

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/BLOG_2_USB/img/Figure8_new.png" alt="MBR non-bootable" caption="VBR's byte offset 0x0E" %}

<h2>Finding the no. of sectors per FAT</h2>
As reading from byte offset 0x16 only works on FAT12 and 16 systems, we will be using the properties panel of FTK to deduce the number of sectors per FAT.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/BLOG_2_USB/img/Figure9_new.png" alt="MBR non-bootable" caption="Properties panel of FTK showing size of FAT." %}

As each sector is 512 bytes, 7499264/512 = 14647.

<h2>Finding no. of FATs</h2>
Read from byte offset 0x10 at VBR, we get the value of 0x02 which translates to 2 FAT tables which can be seen in the file list panel

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/BLOG_2_USB/img/Figure10_new.png" alt="MBR non-bootable" caption="VBR's byte offset 0x10" %}

<h2>Find offset for cluster 11</h2>
As we deduced earlier, the raw data for FOX621_FW_1.png starts at cluster 11. Minus off 2 clusters and times 16 (16 sectors per cluster) which will give you 3474.

<h2>Final result</h2>
Reserved sectors +  (sectors per FAT * no. of FAT) + ([clusters-2] *no. of sectors per clusters )= raw data starting sector.
3474 + (14647*2) + ([11-2]*16) = 32912
This value should be where the raw data storing point is stored.

<h1>6. Retreiving the data</h1>
Click on [root] > Find > Go to logical sector > 32912
{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/BLOG_2_USB/img/Figure12_new.png" alt="MBR non-bootable" caption="Start of cluster 11" %}
Now that we have determine where the raw data starts, all that is left is to determine where it ends. Get the file size from the short file name entry which is the last 4 bytes being 0x000A9795. This means it is exactly 694,165 bytes. 
Now that we got our two very important values,go back to physical sector 32912 > Set selection length > 694165 bytes > save selection > ‘recovered_FOX621_FW_1.png’ > save. 

The image should now be viewable via photos or any other image viewing app.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/BLOG_2_USB/img/Figure13_new.png" alt="MBR non-bootable" caption="selection length set to 694165 bytes" %}

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/BLOG_2_USB/img/Figure14_new.png" alt="MBR non-bootable" caption="Recovered FOX621_FW_1.png" %}

<h1>Recovering deleted image from USB using FAT32 via its image.</h1>

This will roughly go cover the same steps as before.

<h1>1.Go to [root]</h1>

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/BLOG_2_USB/img/Figure15_new.png" alt="MBR non-bootable" caption="FOX621_SAMPLE1_FW evidence list via FTK imager" %}

<h1>2.Find the short file name entry</h1>

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/BLOG_2_USB/img/Figure16_new.png" alt="MBR non-bootable" caption="FOX621_FW_2’s short file name entry" %}

As you can notice, the file name changes when the file is deleted. With the first character being 0x46 replaced by 0xE5. 

<h1>3.Find first cluster in short file name entry</h1>

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/BLOG_2_USB/img/Figure17_new.png" alt="MBR non-bootable" caption="FOX621_SAMPLE2_FW’s first cluster location" %}

The first cluster will be 0x0060. Multiply it by 4 to get 0x0180.

<h1>4. Go to $FAT table </h1>

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/BLOG_2_USB/img/Figure18_new.png" alt="MBR non-bootable" caption="SAMPLE621_SAMPLE2_FW cluster is empty"%}

As the file is permanently deleted, its cluster entry is marked as 0x00000000 allowing it to be overwritten by the data of new files. However, i did add any new files after deleting it which means that the data at cluster 96 should still be there. I got 96 as the cluster before it is 95.

<h1>5. Calculating where the data starts.</h1>

Using the formula from earilier:
The formula is $\text{Reserved sectors} + (\text{sectors per FAT} \times \text{no. of FAT}) + ([\text{clusters}-2] \times \text{sectors per cluster})$

At logical sector 34272, we can see that the data is still present due to the presence of the PNG signature. Assuming we did not add any new files afterwards, it should not have overwritten FOX621_SAMPLE2_FW.png 

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/BLOG_2_USB/img/Figure20_new.png" alt="MBR non-bootable" caption="SAMPLE621_SAMPLE2_FW cluster is empty"%}

<h1>6.Retreiving the data</h1>

Get the file size from the short file name entry which is the last 4 bytes with it being 0x00093F05 aka 605957 bytes. 
Go back to physical sector 34272 > Set selection length > 605957bytes > save selection > ‘recovered_FOX621_FW_2.png’ > save.
The image should be viewable via photos or any other image viewing app.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/BLOG_2_USB/img/Figure21_new.png" alt="MBR non-bootable" caption="Recovered FOX621_FW_2.png"%}

<h1>Conclusion</h1>
I’ll do NTFS next time.